# Getting started

Open connection and REPL for sqlite

    $ sqlite3 <db-file-name>

List the tables

    > .tables

Read in data from last time (you may need to update the path)

    > .read 2018-10-17-script.sql

Try running tables again and you should now see a table

    > .tables
    Movie     Rating    Reviewer

Lets see what the schema looks like

    > .schema
    CREATE TABLE Movie(mID int, title text, year int, director text);
    CREATE TABLE Rating(rID int, mID int, stars int, ratingDate date);
    CREATE TABLE Movie(mID int, title text, year int, director text);

# More about Creating

Last time we dove a little deeper on creating tables and covered:

- Non-null Constraint
- Primary Keys
- Unique attributes
- Default Values
- Foreign Key Constraints

Let's see a few more ways to get the system to maintain the quality of our
data.

## Check constraints

Sometimes it is helpful to have row based constraints. For example, that a GPA
is a real value between 0 and 4.  Lets add a table for a student with name and
GPA and a check constraint.  Lets write all our queries in `query.sql` again so
that we can try some things out.

    drop table if exists Student;

    create table Student(name text, gpa real);
    insert into Student values ('A', -1.98), ('B', 3.2), ('C', 5.3);

And run the query

    > .read query.sql
    Name        gpa
    ----------  ----------
    A           -1.98
    B           3.2
    C           5.3

So far so good.  Lets add a Check constraint

Update `query.sql` to

    drop table if exists Student;

    create table Student(
        name text,
        gpa real,
        check(0 < gpa and gpa <= 4)
    );
    insert into Student values ('A', -1.98), ('B', 3.2), ('C', 5.3);
    select * from Student;

And run the query:

    sqlite> .read query.sql
    Error: near line 8: CHECK constraint failed: Student

Ah, the check constraint failed,  lets fix

    drop table if exists Student;

    create table Student(
        name text,
        gpa real,
        check(0 < gpa and gpa <= 4)
    );
    insert into Student values ('A', 1.98), ('B', 3.2), ('C', 3.3);
    select * from Student;

And, all is working!

## Altering tables

You can always alter the table after.  Lets see how to add a column

    drop table if exists Student;

    create table Student(
        name text,
        gpa real,
        check(0 < gpa and gpa <= 4)
    );
    insert into Student values ('A', 1.98), ('B', 3.2), ('C', 3.3);
    select * from Student;

    alter table Student add id int;
    select * from Student;

Lets try it out:

    > .read query.sql
    name        gpa
    ----------  ----------
    A           1.98
    B           3.2
    C           3.3
    name        gpa         id
    ----------  ----------  ----------
    A           1.98
    B           3.2
    C           3.3

Notice that the second select after the alter statement has an extra column (but
all values are null).  We can give them a default value.  For example, we can
change the alter command to set ids to 7.

    alter table Student add id int default 7;

We will not go into too much more detail on alter, but
see Alter tutorial for [detials](https://www.w3schools.com/sql/sql_alter.asp)
more.

## Auto increment

A really useful type of attribute is an auto incrementing attribute.  Often
these are nice to use as a primary key.  A common pattern is the following

    create table Student(
        id integer primary key autoincrement,
        ... attribute list....
    );

Lets see and example:

    drop table if exists Student;

    create table Student(
        id integer primary key autoincrement,
        name text
    );
    insert into Student(name) values ('Alice'), ('Bob'), ('C');
    select * from Student;

And run it:

    > .read query.sql
    id          name
    ----------  ----------
    1           Alice
    2           Bob
    3           C

Ids are automatically generated!

# Renaming

Sometimes, we may want to rename tables, we can do so with the `as` keyword For
example.  We can rewrite the previous example as:

    > select title, stars, name, ratingDate
    from Movie as M,
      Rating as R1,
      Reviewer as R2
    where M.mID = R1.mID and R2.rID = R1.rID;

Or even columns

    > select title as t, stars as s, name as n, ratingDate as d
    from Movie as M,
      Rating as R1,
      Reviewer as R2
    where M.mID = R1.mID and R2.rID = R1.rID;

Or we can even rename the results for a query when performing nested queries:

    > select *
    from (
        select title, stars, name, ratingDate
        from Movie as M,
          Rating as R1,
          Reviewer as R2
        where M.mID = R1.mID and R2.rID = R1.rID
    ) as Summary
    where stars > 3;


# Substring matching

We can also search by substring matching using the `like` keyword. For example,
we can find all Movie titles with the sub-string 'of' with:

    > select * from Movie where title like '%of%';

# Ordering

We have mentioned in class that the results of a query are not ordered.  In
fact, the order that records are returned may even change from each call of the
same query.  We can force an order though using the `order` keyword.  Lets order
by title ascending with `asc`:

    > select * from Movie order by title asc;

Or by title descending with `desc`:

    > select * from Movie order by title desc;

You may sometimes see the `asc` or `desc` omitted, in which case `asc` is used.

    > select * from Movie order by title;

We can even order by multiple arguments and different directions.  For example
if we wanted to order by title and then break ties with year we can run:

    > select * from Movie order by title asc, year desc;
    Title       year        director
    ----------  ----------  ----------  -------------
    108         Avatar      2009        James Cameron
    104         E.T.        1982        Steven Spielb
    101         Gone with   1939        Victor Flemin
    109         Raiders of  1981        Steven Spielb
    107         Snow White  1997        Michael Cohn
    106         Snow White  1937
    102         Star Wars   1977        George Lucas
    103         The Sound   1965        Robert Wise
    105         Titanic     1997        James Cameron

Notice the order for the two versions of "Snow White".

