# Getting started

Open connection and REPL for sqlite

    $ sqlite3 <db-file-name>

List the tables

    > .tables

Read in data from last time (you may need to update the path)

    > .read 2018-10-17-script.sql

Try running tables again and you should now see a table

    > .tables
    Movie     Rating    Reviewer

Lets see what the schema looks like

    > .schema
    CREATE TABLE Movie(mID int, title text, year int, director text);
    CREATE TABLE Rating(rID int, mID int, stars int, ratingDate date);
    CREATE TABLE Movie(mID int, title text, year int, director text);

# More about Querying

Last time we dove a little deeper in to creating tables and covered:

- Check constraints
- Altering tables
- Auto increment attributes

And more detail on queries covering:

- Renaming
- Nested queries
- Substring matching
- Ordering

We will finish up with summarizing data.

# Aggregation

What if we wanted to summarized data.  We can use aggregate functions  `max`,
`min`, `count`, `avg`, `sum`, to aggregate data.  For example we can find the
max and avg number of starts as

    > select avg(stars), max(stars) from Rating;

But what if we wanted to aggregate on a specific attribute.  For example,
find the max, min, and average number of starts for a move?  We can use a
`group by` clause to specify the subsets for aggregation.

    > select mID, avg(stars)
    from Rating
    group by mID;

Let's try an exercise.  Lets make a query that produces the mID, title,
and min/max/avg of the stars.  For example:

    mID         title               avg(stars)  max(stars)  min(stars)
    ----------  ------------------  ----------  ----------  ----------
    101         Gone with the Wind  3.0         4           2
    103         The Sound of Music  2.5         3           2
    104         E.T.                2.5         3           2
    106         Snow White          4.5         5           4
    107         Snow White          4.0         5           3
    108         Avatar              3.33333333  4           2

One way to solve is with the query:

    > select Rating.mID, title, avg(stars), max(stars), min(stars)
    from Movie inner join Rating on Movie.mID = Rating.mID
    group by Rating.mID;

# Summary

In summary, queries have the following form:

    > SELECT <attribute list>
    FROM <table list>
    [WHERE <condition>]
    [GROUP BY <attribute list>]
    [ORDER BY <attribute list>]

Lets do some problems:

1. Add the reviewer Roger Ebert to your database, with an rID of 209.
2. Insert 5-star ratings by James Cameron for all movies in the database.  Leave
   the review date as NULL.
3. For all movies that have an average rating of 4 stars or higher, add 25 to
   the release year.
4. Remove all ratings where the movie's year is before 1970 or after 2000, and
   the rating is fewer than 4 stars.

